# The Brain as Computer

### Essay for UC Berkeley's VS265

## Introduction

Computers provide a great metaphor for the brain. After all, the original “computers” were humans, using their brains to execute algorithms with pen and paper. The computationalist would argue even further, suggesting that brains are computers. Brains seem to execute algorithms to process information and stimuli, eliciting some response, suggesting some form of “Turing completeness”. I would argue that there is some mathematical equivalence between brains and computers, but not true equality.
Why is this important? Our definition of the brain should tell us about the essence of what it is, and how we decide to study it. If we accept that the brain is a computer, then neuroscience becomes a subfield of computer science [1]. Neural computations would need to be formalized as computer algorithms, and behavior would be defined as computations on mental data structures. Neither of these things are bad, actually quite the opposite. However, what would we stand to lose from this view? Would it still make sense to do behavioral experiments if everything can be determined by algorithms? I would argue that computer science plays an important role in our understanding of the brain, but we have to take an interdisciplinary approach to understand all facets of cognition.
Further, if we accept that the brain is a computer, do we then have to accept that humans are just walking information processing machines? What is the purpose of an information processing machine? If we don’t accept that the brain is a computer, then what is it? Should we take the evolutionary view that it’s a mechanism for survival? Perhaps the brain is the biological equivalent of 10,000 monkeys producing the collected works of Shakespeare.

## A Weird Proof that the Brain is a Computer
### Some Definitions
To understand the idea that brains might be computers, we have to first understand Turing machines. Abstractly, the Turing machine [2] is a mathematical tool that we can use to determine if something is an algorithm. It’s important to note that Turing machines do not exist in real life, and the computers that we use in our daily lives are based on the von Neumann computer architecture, rather than the Turing machine. Nevertheless, the Turing machine can be considered a prototypical computer. The Turing machine is described as a machine with a scanner/printer that can read/write to an infinitely long tape that is filled with symbols. Based on the symbol it reads, it can jump to any other symbol on the tape. It has a finite pool of symbols that it can read. We can basically think of the Turing machine as a computer program that can read if statements, edit the current if statement it’s on, and then jump to another if statement.

Turing (and Church) [1] argued that any series of steps or any function that can be implemented on the Turing machine is an algorithm, and anything that is an algorithm can be implemented on a Turing machine. To determine whether something is a computable function or not, we can test whether it is implemented as an algorithm on a Turing machine. This question of computability is key to understanding what a computer is. A computer must be able to implement any computable function, a computable function can be represented by an algorithm, so a computer must be able to implement any algorithm. Moreover, a Turing machine is a computer, because it can implement any algorithm, by definition.

### Equivalating Brains to Turing Machines
Clearly, a brain is nothing like a Turing Machine in a physical sense (a Turing machine isn’t even a real “thing”), but perhaps they are functionally equivalent. This idea is known as Turing equivalence. Formally, Turing equivalence states that two computers, P and Q are considered equivalent if P can simulate Q, and Q can simulate P [12]. If we can prove that a computer can simulate a brain and vice versa, they will be considered mathematically equivalent. To try to prove this, I’ll loosely follow the argument from Blake Richard’s article “Yes, The Computer is a Brain” [1].

We can prove that a brain is a computer by first proving that a brain is Turing equivalent to a Turing machine, a known computer. For the brain to be considered a computer, it must be able to implement any algorithm that a Turing machine can. For every algorithm, there is some artificial neural network that can implement it, implying that the set of all neural networks is Turing complete [12] (this has been rigorously proven for recurrent neural networks [1]). The neural networks in our brain have additional nonlinearities that make them a superset of all computer neural networks, so they should be able to simulate anything a computer neural net can. Thus, the set of all organic neural networks is Turing complete, and we can say that a brain simulates a computer.
A much harder proof is the reverse, that any Turing machine could simulate a brain. To prove this we could argue that any interaction between neurons can be represented by some computable mathematical function, which in turn could be represented by a Turing machine, given that we break it down far enough. Detractors of the computationalist argument [10] will counter that the Turing machine is discrete and serial in nature, while the brain is fully parallel and continuous. However, Turing machines have infinite memory and no real sense of time, meaning that any computable function in the brain can be replicated with infinitesimal time steps. Given this, it appears that the brain is a computer. The brain can simulate a computer, and the computer can simulate a brain.

## Definition vs. Equivalence
So perhaps the brain is mathematically equivalent to a computer, but that doesn’t mean we have to accept that a brain is a computer. As a comparison, a mathematician might say that a coffee mug is topologically equivalent to a donut (torus) [9] (they both have one hole). Topology is useful, but it does not necessarily form the essence of what a thing is. We would not say that a coffee mug is a donut. I would argue that semantically, the Turing machine is emblematic of what a computer is, while a brain is not, just as a donut is emblematic of a torus, not a coffee mug. I previously mentioned that a Turing machine can implement any continuous, computable function with infinite memory, and that any serial algorithm can be implemented in the brain by a neural network. In both cases, these implementations feel more like “hacks” to achieve similarity than purposeful features. There is value in using the Turing machine to model the processing of mental representations, but this cannot be extended to all areas of cognitive science.

I would compare the differences between a computer and a brain to the differences between a CPU and GPU [8]. Both are silicon chips that execute discrete mathematical instructions. It would even be possible for a GPU to do everything that a CPU can do, and vice versa. However, if you tried to do real-time ray tracing, play modern video games, or train a large neural network on a CPU, you would run into problems. The GPU is built to crunch lots of numbers in parallel, but slowly, while the CPU can execute single operations quickly. If you tried to run a purely sequential algorithm on the GPU, it would be beaten handily by the CPU. The brain is massively parallel, and is great at things like vision that von Neumann computers struggle with. The programmable computer can do atomic math operations in nanoseconds, while a human would take seconds to do the same operation. Mathematical equivalencies are useful, but they do not always give us meaning.

I would even argue that the equivalence is not perfect. If we were to compare the brain to von neumann computers, what level of implementation would we compare the two at? Perhaps the neuronal level. Bell takes on this argument, saying, “while no specific physical processes below the gate-level of a computer interfere with the model-like operation of the computer, this cannot be said for at the neuronal level of the brain. Molecular and biophysical processes control the sensitivity of neurons to incoming spikes… Furthermore, trans-neural volume effects… have been seen to influence coherent neural firing.” [11]. Other levels of implementation (e.g. molecular) run into similar problems. So is our definition of the brain as a computer even useful?

## Does The Computer Definition Help Us Understand The Brain?
Computationalism has taught us a lot about vision. It has helped us prove that we use line detectors (spatial frequencies) along with diagnostic algorithms (e.g. optic flow, Gestalt grouping) to sew together a moving picture. However, while the computational approach can tell us how we identify an object, it can’t actually tell us what the object means. Generally, computations can tell us how something is implemented, but they cannot tell us why it is implemented, what the implications of the implementation are, or how they came to be. Further, if we used a solely computational approach to vision, we would have no reason to believe that Gestalt grouping even exists; we only know about it from studies in psychology.

I believe my argument here is best summed up by Paul Cisek, when he says, “A car may be described as a device for converting chemical energy into kinetic energy. This description is not false, and could serve as the foundation for a scientific study of cars. Such study could lead to theories of how parts of the car contribute to its role of energy conversion (for example, the drive-shaft and axle system may be viewed as a coordinate transformation of kinetic energy) but it would fail to provide a complete picture of the car’s function. In order to understand the purpose of such things as the steering wheel, one has to understand that the function of a car is to transport people. Energy conversion is merely a useful means toward that end” [3].

What is the purpose of a computer? It seems that a computer exists to execute algorithms. Does this match the purpose of a brain? If we take an evolutionary perspective, the brain seems to exist as a survival mechanism. This is still very different from being an algorithm executer. From the perspective of Cisek [3], the brain is a control device. It still takes inputs and generates responses, but it uses these responses as further feedback for learning. It makes decisions and exhibits behavior, unlike a computer. Bell argues something similar with the notion of cycles, which he describes as, “sets of variables that affect each other in such a way that any feed-forward account of causality and control is misleading” [11]. There is malleability and change here, something that computers do not have. This definition is only useful up to a point.

## The Brain As A Civilization
I would argue that the appropriate framework for the brain is a civilization. Both the brain and the civilization are abundant in atomic computational processes, large-scale networks, localized and distributed functions, and a certain amount of executive control. Civilizations are not meant to be a direct comparison for brains, but a didactic tool. I would offer that we should use the same interdisciplinary methods we use to study civilizations to study brains. Others may have already likened brains to civilizations, but I would personally give credit to the movie “Osmosis Jones” for inspiration.

For example, we could construct an imaginary city named “Henopolis”. At the basic level of the city, we have people, which would be equivalent to our neurons. There is still a deep level of understanding required to understand humans, just as there is for neurons. The study of how individual people function and interact with other individuals could be our “neuroscience”. Our version of “psychology” within Henopolis would be the observation of how outside changes to the civilization impact its functioning and behavior. Natural disasters could act as “lesions”, for example. We could examine the town hall getting destroyed in an earthquake the same way we look at the railroad tamp going through Phineas Gage’s prefrontal cortex. There would undoubtedly be some loss in executive function within the society. Furthermore, Henopolis is not just part of a closed loop. It is constantly changing, growing, reacting to the rise and fall of other civilizations. These outside agitators would have profound effects on the future development of the civilization, affecting the culture, the livelihoods of people, the economy. These changes would reverberate through culture, just like the neural loops that bell argues for. He says, “Anything which does not fit the feed-forward model is linguistically demoted to the status of a ‘side-effect’, to be eliminated if possible. But side-effects are nature’s way of telling the scientist that all processes are cyclic [11].

## Conclusion
Is the brain a computer? Well that depends on what the meaning of the word ‘is’ is [7]. We can certainly shoehorn the brain to fit into the definition of an abstract computer, akin to a Turing Machine, and this has its utility. The computational understanding of mind is hugely important to how we understand the brain [6] Mental representations have a direct analogue in the data structures we use in algorithms, and allow us to formalize mental processes as algorithms, ignoring the complex neuronal implementations. This is a lot like using operating systems to act as a barrier between software and hardware, or using object oriented programming to create abstract classes. I would argue that computer scientists don’t even want to think of computers as computers, they abstract away all the sticky details so that they can better understand the thing they’re building.

However, defining the brain as a computer fails to grasp the essence of what a brain actually is. We cannot examine behavior very well through the brain as a computer model. I proposed that we use the framework of a civilization to analyze the brain. This framework is not practical, but ideological; we need to study the brain at all levels of abstraction. This is really the central thesis of Cognitive Science, and what I’m proposing isn’t new at all. The brain is a computer, but it is also a mind, a communication device, a control device, a biological and chemical wonder, and so much more.

If we argue that the brain is a computer, we imply that neuroscience is computer science. I would refute this, and argue that neuroscience and computer science act in tandem, our understanding of one field aids our understanding of the other. Perhaps as time goes on, the things we call computers will have brain-like structures, and our semantic understanding of what a computer is will be equivalent to what our understanding of a brain is. Similarly, we may one day augment our brains with the computational horsepower of computers (some may argue that we already have with cell phones).

## Further Explorations
1. One common criticism I came across for the brain as a computer idea was, “Any dynamical system can implement a computer as described by Turing”. Is this true? Could we implement a computer with a hurricane, arbitrary chemical reactions, or a double pendulum? If so, do we need to reevaluate how we define computers?
2. Is there an algorithm for the mind? If we suppose that the brain is a computer that’s always on, there must be some program that is always running, the “main function”, our mind. Any other algorithm running would just be a subroutine getting “called”. Is it theoretically possible to formalize this “main function” as an algorithm with inputs and outputs? Does this have any serious implications for neuroscience?
3. Is the brain actually continuous? Part of my argument assumes this as fact, but doesn’t prove it. Our understanding of physics would certainly make it seem so, but perhaps the neuronal structure is actually a discrete process. Similarly, could we argue that computers are actually continuous? Transistors are not instantaneous. What would the implications be if we accepted that both brains and computers can be viewed as analog or digital, depending on the scale we choose to view them at?
4. Should we accept that the computer really can simulate the brain? This is the topic of many philosophical debates, most famously in the Chinese Room Argument. Even if we can perfectly model a brain in a computer, will it actually be thinking? Or is there something lost in the translation from organs to silicon?
5. The article Yes The Brain is a Computer [1] makes the argument that neuroscience is a subfield of computer science. How much do you agree with this? What would you say the difference between the two fields is?

## Citations
[1] https://medium.com/the-spike/yes-the-brain-is-a-computer-11f630cad736

[2] https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/turing-machine/

[3] http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.183.1585&rep=rep1&type=pdf

[4] https://www.cell.com/neuron/pdf/S0896-6273(16)31040-6.pdf

[5] https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/church-turing/#MisuThes

[6] https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/computational-mind/

[7] https://www.cnn.com/2017/08/17/politics/tbt-clinton-grand-jury-testimony/index.html

[8] https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2009/12/16/whats-the-difference-between-a-cpu-and-a-gpu/

[9] http://planning.cs.uiuc.edu/node130.html

[10] http://romainbrette.fr/what-is-computational-neuroscience-xxx-is-the-brain-a-computer/

[11] https://redwood.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/bell-levels-loops.pdf

[12] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_completeness






