# Dream Machines

**Essay for UC Berkeley's VS265**

Dreams remain one of the great mysteries of the mind. They’re hard to study, because a person must be asleep to actually dream, and cannot report their experience while dreaming, and we often forget our dreams after they occur, making it hard to form conclusive conclusions. Freud suggested that these dreams reflect, in some way, our deepest desires. This perhaps would explain the narrative structure and emotional weight of some dreams, but this doesn’t really explain the neurological need for dreams. Crick and Mitchison put forth a rather simple hypothesis: In REM sleep, recurrent dreams are used for “reverse learning”, i.e. dreams are used to prune away “parasitic” synaptic connections that we gained throughout the day. Hinton et al. expand upon this idea with their Wake-Sleep Algorithm, which proposes an unsupervised machine learning algorithm that mimics “reverse learning”.
	
The Crick and Mitchison paper [1] describes the process of “reverse learning” (a terrible name in my opinion). Essentially, it argues that REM sleep is used to prune away parasitic connections (connections that are unnecessary for representation and add to “clutter”). This would make sense, as we know that neurogenesis - the formation of new neurons and synaptic connections -  occurs, and we also know that we prune away synaptic connections as we age. It would make sense if a fair amount of this pruning occurred while we are asleep, as it seems like a lot of “maintenance” is done while we’re asleep. Crick and Mitchison argue that recurrent dreams are particularly associated with reverse learning. When we have a recurrent dream, we switch from learning, i.e. strengthening connections between neurons, to reverse learning, i.e. weakening connections between neurons. This stems from the idea that recurrent dreams are anxiety inducing, which would make us want to weaken this particular connection, as the anxiety is related to a “parasitic mode”. This latter part is kinda whacky, but the general idea is that dreams and REM sleep may be associated with the removal and weakening of parasitic synaptic connections.
	
The Wake-Sleep algorithm [2] builds on the ideas of Crick and Mitchison. It proposes a model with a single input layer and multiple hidden layers. There are forward weights that go from the input to the furthest hidden layer. These forward weights are used to produce a neural representation of the input. There are also backward weights that go from the representational layers to the input layer. These backward weights are used generativelly, i.e. they produce possible inputs from representations. In the “Wake” phase, we put inputs through the representational forward weights, and use them to update our generative weights, mimicking the learning that we do when we’re actually awake and aware of the world around us. The “Sleep” phase mimics our REM dream space. The generative weights are used to produce potential “fantasy” inputs, and these inputs are used to update the representational weights, mimicking the reverse learning process.
	
There is no concrete evidence for or against reverse learning, though there are some interesting points to both sides of the argument. First, we notice that the need for REM sleep diminishes as we age, and this is correlated with the amount of learning that we do [3]. Further, in species that have relatively little REM sleep, like echidnas and porpoises [5], we notice a much larger forebrain, suggesting that this extra space overcomes the lack of pruning, or “reverse learning” done by the cortex. We also notice that humans that have issues with REM sleep also have behavioral issues, which could potentially be related to a lack of reverse learning. Indeed, research has suggested that REM sleep is associated with the pruning and maintenance of neurons, as seen in Li et al. [6]. From an algorithmic perspective [4], we notice that algorithms based on reverse learning principle can effectively operate forever, iterating through learning and unlearning cycles. This cycling seems to prevent overloading, as the Crick and Mitchison paper would suggest, and it seems to offer a better model of how we interact with the world, as it can take in a near-continuous stream of inputs and can adapt to these, unlike traditional neural networks. This model gets us closer to something resembling embodied cognition. However, this evidence is clearly not sufficient to prove the reverse learning theory.
	
On the other hand, there really isn’t much evidence to disprove the theory. Primarily, psychologists and neuroscientists have argued that the theory isn’t that precise, making it hard to disprove. Furthermore, the hypothesis doesn’t explain why dreams often have narrative and emotional aspects, as a psychoanalyst like Freud would emphasize [3]. The Li et al. paper points out a relationship between pruning and REM sleep, but it does not make any attempt at proving theories about recurrent dreams. In fact, research seems to show that recurrent dreams are more related to psychological need frustration, rather than reverse learning [7]. We should also point out that there is not a strong relationship between the amount of REM sleep and the level of reverse learning. Babies do not necessarily have more to unlearn than an adolescent, though they have more REM sleep. This point is hard to prove or disprove, as there is so little analysis for it. Clearly, there are some things that cast this hypothesis in doubt, but they are not conclusive either.
	
I would develop an experiment to test Crick and Mitchison's hypothesis. I think the main challenge with studying dreams is that we have no way of actually understanding the things that are actually happening in the cortex while dreaming, as the person dreaming cannot communicate their experiences with a researcher. I would develop a neural decoding model that would follow from the supposed wake and sleep patterns hypothesized by Crick and Mitchison. The neural decoding algorithm would take in brain signals as inputs and form mental representations, exactly like the wake-sleep algorithm. The model would then enter the sleep phase, where it would use the mental representations it formed and generate possible sensory outputs. I would then check for any correlation at a coarse scale between the inputs that the computer model generates and the neural signals that the subject generates while sleeping. This experiment would probably be impossible to do with current technology, but I think there are some ways we could control for all the variables and see if we get any results. For the actual experimental task, we could have a human subject perform some simple task over two hours, and then have them nap for two hours, and record fMRI during both. We could input this fMRI data into the computer model at one-second timesteps to do the unsupervised training. Then, while the subject is sleeping, we would look at their fMRI and compare it to the generative results of the computer model (the sleep phase) and look for any similar activations. Again, this probably wouldn’t work, but I think it highlights that novel decoding techniques could be useful for studying reverse learning. A more simple task would involve comparing a set of REM-deprived rats to a set of control rats, and have them perform some simple memory test. We could see how REM sleep would affect their performance in the memory test. The memory test would need to have some aspect of cognitive overload, so we could see if the lack of REM sleep particularly allows for pruning of parasitic connections, which may result from cognitive overload tasks. I would expect that the REM-deficient rats would have lower performance because they are more susceptible to tests that require sorting out a lot of extraneous details.
	
In conclusion, the Crick and Mitchison hypothesis is interesting, but unproven. The theory could be interpreted as a literal algorithm for what REM sleep does, as seen in the wake-sleep algorithm, or perhaps as some unconscious Freudian process. The wake-sleep algorithm is an important development in getting closer to a natural model of embodied cognition, i.e. that important part of human cognition is the fact that the brain is inside a body that can interact with the world. The wake-sleep algorithm can take arbitrary inputs and form unique mental representations for it, much like the human brain. I can imagine that this would be important for a more general A.I. I would personally hypothesize that this “reverse learning” is an important part of REM sleep, but likely not the only part, and it doesn’t really explain the narrative structure and emotional salience of dreams. I think it’s important that we do more research in the field of sleep and dreams, but it may be the case that we need to investigate novel imaging methods and decoding algorithms to really understand what dreams are doing. I think that the question of whether or not humans are “dream machines” relates to my first essay, whether or not humans are computers. There is clearly some reason for dreams and REM sleep, and perhaps that reason is to prune away “parasitic” synaptic connections, but this seems a bit reductionist as a whole. Just as we could reduce the human brain to being “just a computer”, we could reduce the purpose of dreams to “reverse learning”, but I think this removes an important emotional and psychological element from our understanding of the brain.

## Citations
[1]  Crick, F., & Mitchison, G. (1983). The function of dream sleep. Nature, 304(5922), 111–114. https://doi.org/10.1038/304111a0

[2] Hinton, G., Dayan, P., Frey, B., & Neal, R. (1995). The “wake-sleep” algorithm for unsupervised neural networks. Science, 268(5214), 1158–1161. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7761831 

[3] Brown, D. W. (1993). Crick and Mitchison’s theory of REM sleep and neural networks. Medical Hypotheses, 40(6), 329–331. https://doi.org/10.1016/0306-9877(93)90212-9

[4] Christos, G. A. (1996). Investigation of the Crick-Mitchison reverse-learning dream sleep hypothesis in a dynamical setting. Neural Networks, 9(3), 427–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/0893-6080(95)00072-0

[5] LYAMIN, O., MANGER, P., RIDGWAY, S., MUKHAMETOV, L., & SIEGEL, J. (2008). Cetacean sleep: An unusual form of mammalian sleep. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 32(8), 1451–1484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.05.023

[6] Li, W., Ma, L., Yang, G., & Gan, W. B. (2017). REM sleep selectively prunes and maintains new synapses in development and learning. Nature neuroscience, 20(3), 427–437. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.4479

[7] Weinstein, N., Campbell, R., & Vansteenkiste, M. (2018). Linking psychological need experiences to daily and recurring dreams. Motivation and emotion, 42(1), 50–63. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-017-9656-0
